I sit at a typewriter in a shed at the back of my property. The shed was completed last month but I have animated it in my dreams forever, it’s my _write house_. Dreaming and planning this ideal space across time for the majority of my life, I finally landed it in reality. Smooth sailing now.
I even have a typewriter, here it is! tchink, tchink, tchink, my fingers conduct the beat that my thoughts can dance to. How will my thoughts perform today?
Now that I have crafted the ideal space, I can write uninhibited. Now that I have an attentive audience, I can write like the wind. Now that I have a schedule empty enough for sitting around, I can spill ink for miles.
What will I write?
I want to have a child, but I’m not yearning for it. I make plans to have a child, and have now for at least a year. At the beginning of the year that marked the _trying_ for a child, I was excited. I was close to my femininity. I was close to my family. My emotions were nice to me about it, we were sentimental together and so full of thanks and wonder already. 
And nothing has changed, and nothing has gotten harder, and all my feelings remain, but it’s all very quiet. Quiet, calm, maybe even numb. After a year, and it’s not like I have been counting, I only suddenly realized it has been around a year since . . . .

_He comes home from the office everyday around this time. I can expect the first fifteen minutes after his entrance to be a stream of technical words that I will hardly follow but politely attend to, because I love him and because he still gets excited about the things he works on. Because in itself, that is a blessing for both of us._
_I think of him coming home and what I will say to him, and how he will be. I think that it is his birthday soon, and right after that thought comes my feeling about it- I want him to embrace the celebration of his birthday. How much I want him to feel that he is loved on his birthday is very strong and motivating for me. A tumble of suggestions of plans spin around my mind. He opens the door._
_”Welcome home,” I say as he sets down his things. I adjust to the feeling of him in the room. It’s brighter. I light a stick of incense, I always keep incense on top of the bookshelf. I want to waft up a sense of a warm home. I think he appreciates this. He begins to recite the list of his accomplishments and struggles of the day, as I had anticipated. But it was a good day, there are more accomplishments than there are struggles. He’s happy. So I venture into my line of questioning. I represent my side of the day. I ask, “what do you think you’ll want for your birthday?”_
_I don’t expect much of his answer. He’s not one to put much emphasis on the days that pass. But I get an answer I could not predict. The question was tossed up, and thinking he would toss it back with a joke or a sneer, I lose my composure when I hear his answer: _
_”I want a baby.” He proclaims this, and then smiles his boyish grin at me in amusement of the fact that he made me produce tears so suddenly. We share this smile, half-mischievous, half-serious, for a few moments._
_I’m the first to break it, turning into the kitchen to get dinner started,  swiping at my eyes. I snatch up a dirty dish and scrub it sudsy. In an attempt to explain that rush of emotion that took over me, I say, “You never said that to me before.” He’s silent, I look up again. He’s still smiling, still amused at his effect on me. I can see he’s begun a vision of the future, a rounding of my belly, an expectation. I ask, “You really mean it?”_


The construction of this shed had one very heavy influence, down to the way the pencils are sharpened and stored. I wasn’t sure if I would even use the pencils, but here they are, just like they are in the twin of this shed. That twin belonged to some British writer, I can’t even recall who. In the image of this shed, when I call it to my mind, I see a limbering old man with steaming cup of tea crossing his garden and entering. He is cut off at the neck. The image must have transmitted to me from a video recording, but I cannot recall what it was, or where I saw it. The old man sits back in comfortable, reasonable recliner. He has a tall file cabinet almost at his knees. He places a desk top on his lap where a large book rests, its words exposed. And a pencil tempts him from its very own carved out nook. And there he writes. And he must have written very well, for someone had reason to record this everyday practical ritual he does in order to line himself upright with the source he pulls the words from. 

If you write well enough, they become less interested in what you write, and more interested in how you write it. Don’t tell them exactly how, but of course, you can’t anyway.

I fashioned my shed after that flash of image, mysterious now that I have forgotten its real world connections. It’s all wood interior in here. I can feel the outside, every little change of it. I need that constant motion when I’m sitting still. It has two windows and a door. I had to have my desk under the window. I had to have somewhere to direct my face that wasn’t the wall, or else, I considered, that all my writing would turn rather dark with so much facing the wall. I have written that way before, foolishely and in the first dramatic throws of our attraction to one another: me and writing.

The first time I can remember writing something that _I_ thought was _good_, it was from above my college dorm room. I was perched up on my bunk bed. My roommate was out for the weekend. We were fortunate to have a large window, nearly floor to ceiling. It was the first snow of that year. I was so young, but I was already feeling nostalgic for the life that I lived and left. I had started to learn real lessons from life, and I thought I should record them. 
____________________________________________________________________



