# I

Created: March 28, 2023 12:47 PM

# I

“Prayers for your family during this time of loss. I pray that God gives you all peace and comfort. Mrs. Sutterfield was such a sweet lady. I have lots of memories from Shields Church of the Nazarene that include both her and Brother Sutterfield from my childhood and teenage years.”

“Russell and Esther Zinn and Carolyn Hixson are watching the live stream. Our love and sympathy to your family.”

“Wanda and I watched online. We love your family so much. Our love and prayers are with you all. God bless!”

“So many memories from our growing up years! Looking like twins and doing things together! Glad I was able to be with you by way of the livestream. Would have loved to be there in person! God bless you all! I love you and will be praying for you all!”

“Great memories! First meeting Janis when Richard brought her to hear me sing in the Messiah at SNU. I thought she was so pretty - seeing Janis & Leon at Capitol Hill Church meet and marry quite quickly - Homemade ice cream - Ballgames with Leon & Richard playing for the church - Staying with her in the daytime after a surgery - Visiting at their various pastorates, family reunions, OKC trips. I will always cherish her calls & prayers for me. She was caring, compassionate, competitive, friendly, and outgoing. So sorry for the turn of events with the virus to keep us away. Thanks for the live internet feed. You all had a wonderful service for her. We mourn but rejoice with you that she is rejoicing now in Heaven. Love & Prayers to each of her family.”

---

“Janis Elaine Sutterfield, of Moore, Oklahoma, passed away March 15, 2020 at the age of 81. She was born June 3, 1938 in Urbana, Ohio, to Lewis & Opal (Harshbarger) Zinn. Janis enjoyed playing the piano and taught piano lessons for over 30 years. She was a proud pastor’s wife and devoted her life to church and taught Sunday School. Janis was a prayer warrior and was very sensitive to people’s needs. She enjoyed entertaining and was a great hostess. Janis was very friendly and loved to make people happy. She could spell any word and enjoyed working crossword puzzles. Janis deeply loved and enjoyed her family, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. She is survived by her husband, Melvin Leon Sutterfield; 2 daughters, Cheryl Seymour & husband, Culley, and Carol Fowlkes & husband, Eddie; 5 grandchildren, Shawn Seymour & wife, Rachael, Scott Seymour & wife, Bristol, Jay Seymour & wife, Madi, Maddi Kade & husband, Chris, and Jana Kelsay & husband, Austin; 4 great-grandchildren, McCartney Seymour, Scottie Seymour, Bobby Grace Seymour, and Luke Seymour; 6 siblings, Alice Kaup, Edith Williams, Russell Zinn, Roy Zinn, Joyce Forrider, and Richard Zinn; and a host of other loving family members and friends. Janis is preceded in death by her parents, Lewis & Opal Zinn; sister, Marjory Brown; and brother, Raymond Zinn. Funeral Services will be held at 10:00 AM, Wednesday, March 18, 2020 at Shartel Church of God, located at 11600 S. Western Ave., in Oklahoma City. Interment will be held at 3:00 PM, at Pryor Cemetery, in Stuart, Oklahoma. There will be a livestream option available through the church so people can feel free to watch at home if they are unable to attend in person.”

**Jana**

*funeral*

A sanctuary with high, vaulted ceilings constructed in warm wood makes an octagonal shape. Rows of pews in straight lines face a stage set with greenery, instruments, cords and cables. A darkened baptistry rests at the back, awaiting use. A pulpit marks the center of the room. It is brightly lit. People fill the pews, wearing dark colors. Beautiful flower arrangements cheer up the purposeful solemnity of the occasion; they are gathered around a blush colored casket. Near it, a few men in muted suits stand at respectful attention and direct the proceedings of the funeral.

I am seated near the stage. My family fills in the space around me. I hold onto my husband’s hand beside me for the length of the service, until it is my turn to go up and speak the words I have prepared to say about my grandmother.

*Remembering Grandma*

*For the past several years, we’ve been slowly losing my grandma. We know what it’s like to have grandma around but not really have grandma around. Good health hasn’t come easy to her. Worry, fear, discouragement were feelings she knew well. There were times that those feelings were closer to her than any person could have been.*

*It’s uncomfortable for me to confront the fact that she endured a lot of pain. Especially in her final days, pain was written all over her. There isn’t any comfort in that. It’s hard to deal with it. My family, we’ve done a hard thing. My mom and my aunt, you have done an extremely difficult thing. My grandpa, I can’t imagine what it has been for you to see Grandma through this. But I realize that even though it is one of the most difficult things to do, even though there is little comfort to draw from the experience, seeing Grandma through this last struggle is how we honor her the most. Gathering around her just to witness her last breath is an act of the deepest love. It’s a kind of love that people don’t talk about often. It’s not very pretty.*

*I’m really proud of my family. We have a new appreciation for our time together. We realize how precious our presence in each other’s lives really is. I’m thankful my grandma and my grandpa centered their family on the gospel of Jesus Christ. Because of that, we have a source of comfort and of hope.*

*When my brothers and my cousin and I were little kids, we would often stay at the grandparents’ house for a night. It was a big deal; I even had a tiny branded suitcase for the event that read, “Going to Grandma’s.” And every night before we would go to bed, they would gather us into the living room, we would kneel at the couch, and grandpa would pray for us. Those prayers are more than memories that we bring into adulthood. They really mean something. They mean that I have grandparents who have deeply cared for me for all of my life.*

*I will miss my grandma’s face and how she lit up with joy every time one of us grandkids or great grandkids entered her home. I don’t believe we’ll ever be used to not having her join us in a game of Catchphrase. I’m so thankful today that her pain is finally relieved and I know she’s rejoicing. I rejoice with her.*

The paper I’m reading from makes a distracting dance by my shaking fingers. My voice trembles. I try to speak the words with the full force of the meaning behind them, but I fear some is lost. I worry that these words reveal too much, that perhaps they reveal things which are better left unsaid. They come out like heavy rocks moved for the first time in years, revealing careful forms made of careless time. I am aware that as I speak, I am making a history. I worry I’m not the right one to make it.

After myself and a number of my family members have spoken, revealed our hearts, and returned to our seats, it is grandpa’s turn. He takes the stage. He is acclimated to the place behind the pulpit, much of his life has been lived teaching from it. He looks natural there. He places his hand on the papers set in front of him. The right side of his body leans into the left in a comfortable position. He removes his opposite hand from his trouser’s pocket, swings it forward to meet its partner, clears his throat, sets his shoulders, and begins to speak. Of this speech, I remember only two words, repeated throughout as if in place of all the words which could fill the space of 60 years of dedicated marriage: “*precious woman.*” I tighten the hold my fingers have of my husband’s hand.

Grandpa finishes and removes himself from the stage. He sits in the inside aisle of the nearest pew. He sits alone, surrounded by us, and an empty space beside him. I try not to notice the empty space. I imagine his life continuing on from this funeral service, at home, alone. It is a blurry image. I am uncertain of what his loss will mean to him. What will his grief be like? How will he need me now? I hear sniffling from family gathered around me in the pews. I know their thoughts are clouded with worries like mine. We all must have felt a little more alone when we lost Grandma. Something constant in our world ceased to be.

I keep my focus at the front of the room. The quiet becomes a refuge. The solitude this silence offers brings me back to memories of my grandparent’s house. I rely on them now as if they are a soundtrack to my grieving. I can see the green carpet in the living room where I would sit with my knees bent, legs tucked underneath me, running my hands over like it was the surface of water, imagining fish beneath it. And next to it, the cabinet where the cassette tapes of our Christmases wait for us to play them back again. The setting at grandpa and grandpa’s house never changed, and neither did they, not by much. Grandma’s hair held the same tight white curls. Grandpa always gave the same big hug. They attended every school play, every ball game. At their house, it was always Cheerio’s for breakfast, bologna sandwich for lunch, goulash for dinner, and an ice cream dessert.

The completeness of my memory is what I treasure, it is a solid object. It doesn’t slip away, like other memories more fleeting and confused with emotion. The constancy of grandparents develops solid memories. These live with me, available for me to return to for comfort, the solid pieces forming into a completed image. It tells me I know where I come from. This is how home is created. A deep connection with the past allows for a foundation from which to build the future. Grandparents make this possible. Our lives intertwine in a precious tapestry, using the past, blending the present, imagining the future.

It is the moment in the funeral when the casket is prepared for viewing. It is the moment we find out if she’s really in there, if she looks like herself. We will see how changed she must be by death or by funeral home hands. Silence accompanies the preparation, a fitting arrangement. In this silence, I have a mind of worries, yet a stillness resides in me, unmoved. I prepare to meet my grandmother’s face, washed in rest.

The procession begins. Those who occupy the back row make their way forward. A man approaches on his own. He wears a suit and tie. I recognize his face; I knew him as a child. He was a member of my Grandpa’s church. Here in the aisle, he meets grandpa’s gaze as he approaches the front row. He stops, turns to him, and bows his head. Grandpa acknowledges with a solemn nod. The man moves on.

I witness this from my seat, and I become overwhelmed with emotion. All of this service I have seen through dry eyes, only now do I hang my head and let emotion shake out of my shoulders and fall onto my face as tears. It’s something strange. In this moment, I see my grandfather’s entire life. I see the man that he is. I see a journey reaching its end. The fullness of this life is shown to me, and I see him as if for the first time.

---

*apprehension*

Am I allowed to talk about apprehension when I talk about my grandfather?

I am outside his home, looking to the closed door, feeling apprehensive.

This is not something I am used to. I have visited the place many times and know it well. I have been cared for so well by my grandfather all of my life, never having a reason to doubt his intentions. What I feel now is, I suppose, something that happens when you have to meet your grandpa all over again, when you have to go to ‘grandpa’s house’ and not ‘the grandparent’s house.’

My grandpa is a good man. He is real and true and pure. He is honest and hard working. He likes to show me the plants in his garden and describe how the weather may be affecting the growth of each one. He wears a baseball cap and a buttoned up dress shirt tucked into khaki pants with tennis shoes. His hair has been gray as long as I’ve known him. His big ears hold up his thick glasses. One of his eyes is totally blind. It is milky white and pale blue. He tells jokes. He always has one. He enjoys himself so much when he tells a joke. His eyes gleam, even the pale one. His shoulders shake. He smiles a satisfied smile, and the joke, usually, falls flat.

My grandpa is a good man, so why do I feel apprehension about our meeting? Perhaps it appeared the moment my grandmother’s casket was laid in the ground, something born from the uncertainty of loss. We traveled to Stuart to have her joined with grandpa’s resting family there immediately after her funeral service. It was a drive long enough to recover a cheerful spirit among us. We gathered in a small chapel at the burial grounds. Outside the sun was glowing over a pond at the foot of a grassy hill. I was surprised by the serenity of Stuart. My brother said a prayer, we passed tissues around, and then we found her plot. Someone recited a verse, and it happened, we laid her to rest in a beautiful place far away from us.

I thought that was the end. The day had been long, filled with sorrow, longing, peace and hope. All the necessary ceremonies were complete. But in the cemetery, each of us starting to tear away and return to our vehicles, grandpa began a resolute march in the opposite direction, his back to us, and getting smaller as he walked faster. He was heading for a grove of trees. I thought and puzzled over it, where could he be going in such a hurry, in such a place, at such a time? Perhaps he needed the cover of shadow for a moment as a new wave of emotion came over him. Perhaps this is his grief mobilized, away from us, the way I feared it. I met questioning eyes with other family members, and my mother said, “He must be going to look for the others.” She meant the others who are buried.

I know my grandpa is a good man, but I don’t really know him. I don’t know what it means to watch him walk away. It feels like a planet is between us, as if we have carried out our days on different hemispheres, and our language is incomprehensible to each other. His life has been one of service and sacrifice. He has lived his life as an offering to God. I don’t know how to begin to compare our lives, somewhat out of fear and uncertainty from my life’s incompleteness, somewhat out of an expectation that I will reveal myself to be an unfavorable granddaughter to such a wonderful man. The world I inhabit is so different from the world that shaped him.

After staring for a few long, apprehensive moments at the front door of grandpa’s house, I make my way inside. I have arrived to help him, something I have wanted to do for some time. I am filling in a cleaning duty that he finds himself unable to complete, it hurts his back too much to twist and shove a mop around the floors. He is seated in his comfy chair ready to greet me as I step through the door. He says, “How’s Jana?” with a knowing grin. I say, “I’m pretty good, grandpa, how are you?” He shows me the cleaning supplies.

I finish the job in a little over 20 minutes. The wooden floors now have a shining gleam and a fresh scent. I join him in the living room and take a seat across from him on the couch, perched on the edge, for I am not sure how long I should stay. Leaving my grandparent’s house within an hour of arriving does not feel right. I have never done that before. I wait for him to speak. When he does, he asks about my job. I tell him it’s going well. An exchange of insignificant information begins between us. There are stops and starts to it, the information passing as if through traffic. A bit nervously, I land each phrase with something sarcastic and a soft chuckle. Grandpa does the same. I wonder if this is a family trait. We move onto the subject of where I live. He asks me to remind him of the location. I give him the street names: May and 63rd. Suddenly, I realize I’ve found it: a link. Grandpa knows May and 63rd. He brightens up, looks deeply into the far corner of the room, and describes the May and 63rd of his life. “Well, Donny and I worked over there at the electric company. And him and his wife lived down the street, not too far away, in a beautiful house. I stayed with them for a while when I returned from the Navy.” He offers details, I interject questions, and our conversation moves along steadily. I gather new pieces of his life that I hadn’t known before, and old pieces of the place I live which time has buried. When I leave, I feel lighter.